docs: add deployment doc (#7)
yongenaelf/aelf-docs: docs/testing-deployment/deploy/single.md

title: Single contract
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Contract deployment on AElf explorer

## 1. Introduction

AElf empowers users to seamlessly deploy smart contracts onto the AElf blockchain using the AElf Explorer. This 
user-friendly platform allows individuals to deploy contracts directly onto the main chain or side chains through the 
Explorer interface. With the AElf Explorer, users can efficiently interact with and deploy smart contracts, contributing 

> to a more accessible and streamlined blockchain development experience on the AElf ecosystem

Reviewer: Add a period "." to the end of the sentence.

> to a more accessible and streamlined blockchain development experience on the AElf ecosystem

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to a more accessible and streamlined blockchain development experience on the AElf ecosystem.
```

## 2. AElf explorer address

### Test env:
- Mainchain: https://explorer-test.aelf.io/
- Sidechain: https://explorer-test-side02.aelf.io/
### Live env:
- Mainchain: https://explorer.aelf.io/
- Sidechain: https://tdvv-explorer.aelf.io/

## 3. Deployment on testnet sidechain

AElf provides users with the flexibility to deploy smart contracts directly onto the sidechain of the test environment 
without the need for explicit approval. This feature streamlines the development process, allowing developers to 
conveniently test their contracts on-chain. The following content will guide users on the specific steps to deploy 
contracts in this hassle-free manner.

### 3.1 Implement acs12.proto

Before deploying a contract to any AElf chain, it is essential to ensure that the contract has implemented ACS12. ACS12 

> is a standard AElf package designed to display gas fees to users. The Acs12.proto file is a prerequisite for deployment 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is a standard AElf package designed to display gas fees to users. The acs12.proto file is a prerequisite for deployment 
```

import public "aelf/options.proto";
import public "google/protobuf/empty.proto";
import public "google/protobuf/wrappers.proto";
import "aelf/core.proto";

option (aelf.identity) = "acs12";
option csharp_namespace = "AElf.Standards.ACS12";

service UserContract{
    
}

//Specified method fee for user contract.
message UserContractMethodFees {
  // List of fees to be charged.
  repeated UserContractMethodFee fees = 2;
  // Optional based on the implementation of SetConfiguration method.
  bool is_size_fee_free = 3;
}

message UserContractMethodFee {
  // The token symbol of the method fee.
  string symbol = 1;
  // The amount of fees to be charged.
  int64 basic_fee = 2;
}
```
Users must ensure that they have implemented ACS12 in their smart contracts; otherwise, the deployment of the smart 
contract will fail. Users can reference ACS12 in the following way and implement it into their smart contracts.

Here is how `HelloWorld_Contract.proto` implements ACS12:

```protobuf title="HelloWorld_Contract.proto" showLineNumbers
syntax = "proto3";

import "aelf/core.proto";
import "aelf/options.proto";
import "google/protobuf/empty.proto";
import "google/protobuf/wrappers.proto";

> import "Protobuf/reference/acs12.proto";

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import "google/protobuf/wrappers.proto";
// highlight-next-line
import "Protobuf/reference/acs12.proto";
```

// The namespace of this class
option csharp_namespace = "AElf.Contracts.HelloWorld";

service HelloWorld {
  // The name of the state class the smart contract is going to use to access blockchain state
  option (aelf.csharp_state) = "AElf.Contracts.HelloWorld.HelloWorldState";

>   option (aelf.base) = "Protobuf/reference/acs12.proto";

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  option (aelf.csharp_state) = "AElf.Contracts.HelloWorld.HelloWorldState";
  // highlight-next-line
  option (aelf.base) = "Protobuf/reference/acs12.proto";
```

  // Actions (methods that modify contract state)
  // Stores the value in contract state
  rpc MyMethod (google.protobuf.Empty) returns (google.protobuf.Empty) {
  }
}

```

Then build it again.

```bash copy
dotnet build
```

### 3.2 Get test tokens for deployment

> Go to https://explorer-test-side02.aelf.io/proposal/proposals and login portkey account, and transfer some tokens to 
> sidechain as the smart contract will be deployed on sidechain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to https://explorer-test-side02.aelf.io/proposal/proposals and login with your [Portkey](https://portkey.finance/) wallet account, and transfer some tokens to 
sidechain as the smart contract will be deployed on sidechain.
```

> If you haven't don't have test tokens on your account, you may go to https://testnet-faucet.aelf.io/ to get some free 
> test tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you do not have ELF tokens in your account on testnet, you may visit the [Testnet Faucet](https://testnet-faucet.aelf.io/) to get some free ELF testnet tokens.
```

Here is how to transfer test tokens to a side chain:
![transfer](transfer.gif)

### 3.3 Submit a proposal

> Go to https://explorer-test-side02.aelf.io/proposal/proposals , and click "Apply" (if apply button can not be found, please 
> login first), and select "Deploy/Update Contract", upload the `/<your_contract_name>.dll.patched` file in project folder

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to https://explorer-test-side02.aelf.io/proposal/proposals, and click "Apply" (if apply button is not visible, please login first), and select "Deploy/Update Contract", upload the `/<your_contract_name>.dll.patched` file in project folder
```
